So we have just talked about DICOMweb and DMC services,
which are the networking services which you could
use to communicate on the clinical network.
So let us recap and let us talk a little bit
about what are the things that communicate over the clinical network.
We can have several types of systems there.
You can have clinical record storage systems,
like systems that store medical images
or systems that store other types of patients records.
You can have modalities,
which are things like CT, MR,
or X-ray scanners or ultrasound scanners,
or pretty much anything else that can acquire data in DICOM format.
You have workstations.
These are the diagnostic workstations that radiologists,
that people like Mazen use to interpret medical images and read their reports.
Finally, you can have AI systems,
which can take multiple forms,
but also which are valid actors on a clinical network.
Let us take a closer look in the clinical lingo,
or clinical IT lingo,
used to describe different agents that operate in clinical networks.
We have talked about storage systems and we have
mentioned the medical imaging archiving systems.
Those systems are called PACS,
Picture Archiving and Communication Systems.
These are imaging, digital image and archives.
First one was deployed in 1972.
So VNAs, Vendor Neutral Archives,
have came into being relatively recently,
and the reason why they appear,
it was because the PACS systems were invented in the '70s,
before the World Wide Web was invented and before the DICOM standards.
So originally, PACS were storing and communicating data in proprietary formats.
There was a motion to liberate this data and to move
this data to the Cloud and have this data be more accessible,
and that's how the term VNA was coined.
But you can think about VNAs as basically another type of medical imaging archive.
Then we have the EHRs.
EHR stands for Electronic Health Records System,
and basically this is a digital system for
storing everything else about the patient's journey through the hospital,
not only the imaging data.
You can think of PACS as a clinical or administrative data archives.
First PACS systems were deployed in 1960s,
and these were probably the first networked data storage systems ever.
Then you might see the term called RIS.
RIS stands for Radiology Information System.
You can think of a RIS as
sort of a mini EHR that a Medical Imaging Department would operate.
It's a system that takes care of radiology administration,
patients scheduling, and keeping track of patients records.
A RIS system would be communicating with an EHR,
to pull some of the relevant patients record informations.
Then we have the protocols.
For the protocols, we have already talked about DICOM.
DICOM that defines the medical image storage and transmission.
DICOM was created in 1985.
Http was created in the 90s,
so you can see why some of
the DMC services might seem a little bit odd to you these days.
Then we have a couple of protocols that
EHR and RIS systems used to communicate with each other when data,
which is non-imaging data,
needs to be communicated.
One such format is called HL7, Health Level 7.
This is a protocol used to transfer administrative and clinical information,
has been invented in the 80s.
Other such format is called FHIR,
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources.
HL7 has lot of things about it that were not really that
modern now that we look at how network systems communicate.
FHIR was designed to be an answer to that and
to bring to the world a more modern version of the HL7 format.
So as you have seen, when it comes to integrating
your models and algorithms into clinical network,
there is a lot of what can be seen as ancient history here.
Some of the patterns and some of the tools and protocols,
date back into the 60s.
So don't be surprised when you see some things in clinical networks
which do not make sense from modern networking perspective.
Now, let's take a look at the diagram of a clinical network.
So on the left, within a hospital network boundary,
you might have here different modalities.
As we have mentioned, these modalities could be CT, MR scanners,
could be X-ray machines that take radiographs,
could be some geography machines,
could be ultrasound machines.
Typically, those modalities use DICOM to communicate with PACS systems,
the clinical imaging archives.
A PACS system would be a central storage systems for all things imaging.
The clinical diagnostic workstations,
the workstations which are physical computers,
where doctors sit at them and interpret images,
radiologists and other clinical specialties,
they would be communicating to a PACS system to pull data into what
typically are thick clients, enterprise image-view programs.
We will see an example of one later in this lesson.
Then the PACS system would be communicating to
a clinical administrative data systems like an EHR and RIS,
and a PACS system would be using HL7 or FHIR messages to communicate with those.
This could be messages that has to do with patient admission,
which has to do with fulfilling orders for imaging procedures.
This could be messages that has to do with storing
radiological reports that radiologists produce.
You can also have systems which sit outside clinical network,
like a Cloud-based VNA archive,
could be sitting outside Clinical Network,
and could be used to transfer data
between different physical locations over hospital system.
Sometimes a communication with a VNA archive
could be organized with the over DICOM web protocol.
So keeping this picture in mind,
let's look now where would AI algorithm fit in here.
What things do you need to keep in mind when
deploying your AI system into a network like this.